# CCWG Meeting Minutes, IETF 125

Adapted from ietfminutes.org and [the recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mWwjNYJ7kRw) by Reese Enghardt

## Increase of the Congestion Window when the Sender Is Rate-Limited

[draft-ietf-ccwg-ratelimited-increase](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-ccwg-ratelimited-increase/)

The chairs noted that non-trivial changes were made after the last call. The Working Group was asked to review the latest version to ensure continued consensus.

## BBRv3

[draft-ietf-ccwg-bbr](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-ccwg-bbr/), [slides](https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/125/materials/slides-125-ccwg-bbr-updates-00)

Seeking input on [Issue #71](https://github.com/ietf-wg-ccwg/draft-ietf-ccwg-bbr/issues/71): Add standardized test cases to help implementers avoid common pitfalls.

Ingemar Johansson: I saw a paper regarding BBR testing, which showed some room for improvement for coexistence. Did you look into it?

Neal Cardwell: I remember a paper named "Promises and potential of BBRv3. We are aware some coexistence properties are not as good as we would like, and they can be worse than BBRv2 due to some of the bog fixes. We are contiuing to do R&D on the algorithm are are open to suggestions from the community.

Antonio Vicente: I was wondering about your implementation experience about the probe up phase mimicing the startup phase.

Ian: The authors have discussed a few times and it would make the algorithm simpler, but we need data to be comfortable that this is safe. 

Neal: The algorithm in the draft and code in the TCP BBRv3 code on Github in the TCP BBRv3 is what we are using at Google for both internal and on WAN TCP traffic. So we have a fair amount of experience and we think it performs pretty well, but are always open to hearing people's test results or analysis.

Antonio: I haven't looked at the kernel implementations. I have looked at multiple QUIC implementations and they vary what they do.

Neal: I haven't looked at other implementations but if someone wants to summarize those on the mailing list or in Github, we can discuss our thoughts on what people are experiment with.

Lars Eggert: I wanted to thank everyone for pushing on BBR. We don't have an implementation, but the document is getting better and you can just implement and be reasonably sure you aren't shooting yourself in the foot. So don't take silence for no interest.

## SCReAMv2

[draft-johansson-ccwg-rfc8298bis-screamv2](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-johansson-ccwg-rfc8298bis-screamv2/), [slides](https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/125/materials/slides-125-ccwg-scream-v2-01)

Stuart Cheshire: Question about discarding late frames when it's too late to display. But if you have an I-frame followed by a serios of P-frames, you may need it to construct the frame that comes next. If you throw away the I-frame you may have to wait until the next I-frame.

Ingemar: I agree it's a bad idea in some cases. May need to clarify in the draft.

Stuart: My other point is the next slide which has boxes with arrows with the UDP socket giving feedback. That's extreme wishful thinking, and why I have a draft called active buffer management. You should get feedback from the UDP socket, telling you to slow down.

Ingemar: Yes, originally it was RTCP feedback but we generalized. Could be ACK frames or RTCP feedback.

Stuart: So the feedback you mean is generated by the congestion controller, inside that gray box, not input.

Reese Enghardt: Thank you for bringing back the draft. We have a WebRTC and a Chrome implementation now, am I missing any others? (silence) I'll take that as a No for now. Let's talk about adoption criteria explicitly: Empirical evidence of safety. Do we have slides or other artifacts that give us details on the testing regarding evidence of safety?

Ingemar: We have testing data but it's not published. We have some for remote control demos. I need to look at if it's possible to publish it but I belive the WebRTC should be.

Reese: The other criterion is stated intent to deply. Can you summarize briefly?

Ingemar: We have Google's WebRTC implementation and Ericsson code is mainly running code that is avaiable for anyone who wants to experiment with the remote control. Some of them are running in Las Vegas now and some in Germany are pending government approval to deploy.

Harald Alvestrand: Google is running experiment on enabling L4S support and our current congestion control algorithms do not consider the L4S signal, so we are jumping on SCReAM, and if it proves good for the general case, we'll push it as the standard congestion control for WebRTC connections. Comment to Stuart, there are a couple of tricks to decide what to throw away. In the Chrome implementation, the congestion control renderer lives in the renderer process which is a bit far away from the network process and there is some feedback signals from the congestion control algorithm and operating signal thinks it's the UDP socket.

Stuart: My comment was about the lack of back pressure, which leads to someone sending 5 Gbps over a 1 Gbps link and concluding UDP is faster.

**Show of hands: CCWG has the time and interest to take on work in the media congestion control area: 32 Yes, 0 No, 10 no opinion, of 68 total**

Zaheduzzaman Sarker: I thought we already had a consensus that we want to do this.

Eric Kinnear: Yes, we talked about doing work in the media congestion control area. Now we are talking about whether we have the time and bandwidth, as we closed out some things from prior meetings, so we have more bandwidth available.

**Show of hands: I have read a version of draft-johansson-ccwg-rfc8298bis-screamv2: 8 Yes, 27 No, 1 no opinion, of 70 total**

**Show of hands: draft-johansson-ccwg-rfc8298bis-screamv2 is a good starting point for this work, CCWG should adopt it: 10 Yes, 0 No, 23 no opinion, of 68 total**

## Rapid Startup of Congestion Control

[draft-kazuho-ccwg-rapid-start](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-kazuho-ccwg-rapid-start/), [slides](https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/125/materials/slides-125-ccwg-rapid-start-00)

Martin Duke: How does Rapid Start interact with other flows at a bottleneck?

Kazuho: We did not, because it's a startup algorithm and fairness is more about convergence.

Martin: It'd be interesting to see some simulations of slow start and rapid start simultaneously.

Antonio: I put some questions on the list. Is there anything we can do to detect how much bandwidth was left to not exit early or late from the 3x phase?

Kazuho: We have a high score put some search we can do to detect queu buildup. We can just choose a value we like and see how it goes.

Yoshifumi Nishida: TCP has a RFC 6675 which calculates outstanding packets and lost packets using SACK blocks. Is RFC 6675 not good enough or are you talking about TCP implementations that don't support it?

Kazuho: I don't have experience with TCP.

Neal Cardwell: The algorithm's requirements (bytes acked/lost per ACK) are available in Linux TCP. I suggest looking at how these ideas could apply to BBR.

Gorry: I was curious about your simulation or experiment startup. Did you look at a range of scenarios?

Kazuho: We have per POP data and per object size bin data.

Gorry: It'd be great to see an ICCRG talk which goes into different bottleneck configurations and traffic sharing.

Lars: Mozilla has a pluggable slow start framework in the QUIC stack and we have a student worker who implemented the traditional one and HyStart and I think SEARCH is next, I'll try to get him to implement Rapid Start as well. At which point we can do AB testing, try to gather some apples to applies because we are not a CDN. If there are other people working on slow start and have metrics in mind, please let us know on the email list.

**Show of hands: CCWG has the time and interest to take on work on improving slow start: 13 Yes, 2 No, 7 no opinion, of 73 total**

**Show of hands: I have read a version of draft-kazuho-ccwg-rapid-start: 5 Yes, 16 No, 0 no opinion, of 73 total**

**Show of hands: draft-kazuho-ccwg-rapid-start is a good starting point for this work, CCWG should adopt it: 5 Yes, 4 No, 16 no opinion, of 76 total**

## C4

[draft-huitema-ccwg-c4-design](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-huitema-ccwg-c4-design/), [draft-huitema-ccwg-c4-spec](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-huitema-ccwg-c4-spec), [draft-huitema-ccwg-c4-test](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-huitema-ccwg-c4-test/), [slides](https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/125/materials/slides-125-ccwg-presenting-c4-christians-cc-code-02)

Lars: A new general-purpose congestion control algorithm should undergo academic peer review (e.g., at a conference like SIGCOMM or IMC) before being adopted by the IETF.

Suhas Nandakumar: Cisco is experimenting with C4 for Media-over-QUIC (MoQ) due to its performance in high-jitter environments like Wi-Fi.

Neal: About the stability and convergence of MIMD. Are you including BBR class algorithms in these concerns?

Christian:I saw the same issue with BBRv1.

Neal: If you could share some examples on the list, I'd be interested.

**Show of hands: I have read a version of any of the C4 drafts: 7 Yes, 18 No, 0 no opinion, of 73 total**

## Analysis for the Adverse Effects of LEO Mobility on Internet Congestion Control

[draft-lai-ccwg-lsncc](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-lai-ccwg-lsncc/), [slides](https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/125/materials/slides-125-ccwg-analysis-for-the-adverse-effects-of-leo-mobility-on-internet-congestion-control-00)


(Out of time)

**Multi-level Congestion Response Framework with Long-haul Congestion Notification for DCI Networks**, [draft-tian-ccwg-long-haul-cnp](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-tian-ccwg-long-haul-cnp/), _Kan Zhang_, 5 minutes, [slides](https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/125/materials/slides-125-ccwg-draft-tian-ccwg-long-haul-cnp-00-00)
